Improve database management documentation (#593)
bitwarden/contributing-docs: docs/contributing/database-migrations/mssql.md

Reviewer: 🤔 Would a simple example of the process make sense? The EDD page has [some sample code](https://contributing.bitwarden.com/contributing/database-migrations/edd#migrations-1); showing where each of those go in the filesystem would be enough, I think.

Author: Added folder names under each tab for clarity.

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# MSSQL

:::info

For instructions on how to apply database migrations, please refer to the
[Getting Started](../../getting-started/server/database/mssql/index.md) documentation.

:::

:::tip

We recommend reading [T-SQL Code Style](../code-style/sql.md) since it has a major impact in how we
write migrations.

:::

## SQL database project

> The separate database definitions in `src/Sql/.../dbo` serve as a "master" reference for the

Reviewer: ⛏️ No need for scare quotes here.

```suggestion
The separate database definitions in `src/Sql/.../dbo` serve as the source of truth for the
```

Author: It's an analogy to a master copy of something, like an album recording. This content just moved its position by the way.

Reviewer: Yes, I know. "The source of truth" is both more inclusive than "master reference", and more accurate as a description.

intended and final state of the database at that time. This is crucial because the state of database
definitions at the current moment may differ from when a migration was added in the past. These
definitions act as a lint and validation step to ensure that migrations work as expected, and the
separation helps maintain clarity and accuracy in database schema management and synchronization
processes.

Additionally, a
[SQL database project](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure-data-studio/extensions/sql-database-project-extension-sdk-style-projects)
is in place; however, instead of using the auto-generated migrations from
[DAC](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/data-tier-applications/data-tier-applications?view=sql-server-ver16),
we manually write migrations. This approach is chosen to enhance performance and prevent accidental
data loss, which is why we have both a `sqlproj` and standalone migrations.

## Modifying the database

In accordance with the tenets of [Evolutionary Database Design](./edd.mdx) every change must be
considered as split into two parts:

1. A backwards-compatible transition migration
2. A non-backwards-compatible final migration

> It is likely that a change does not require a non-backwards-compatible end phase e.g. all changes
> may be backwards-compatible in their final form; in that case, only one phase of changes is
> required. With the use of beta testing, partial roll-outs, [feature flags](../feature-flags.md),

Reviewer 2: This is a very twisty sentence.

```suggestion
Most changes are entirely backwards-compatible in their final form. If this is the case, only one phase of changes is required. With the use of beta testing, partial roll-outs, [feature flags](../feature-flags.md),
```

etc. the often-chosen path is to spread a change across several major releases with a calculated
future state that can perform a "cleanup" migration that is backwards-compatible but still

> represents an overall-_incompatible_ change beyond the boundaries of what we need for individual

Reviewer: ⛏️ Our communication guidelines indicate we should avoid italics and prefer bold because international fonts don't render italics well.

```suggestion
represents an overall-**incompatible** change beyond the boundaries of what we need for individual
```

Reviewer: It's in the [Technical Writers Style Guide](https://bitwarden.atlassian.net/wiki/x/D4BTN).

> release safety.

Reviewer 2: I don't follow what you're going for with this sentence. If a migration is performed that leaves the DB in an incompatible state, it is by definition a finalization migration for the initial transitional migration. If the DB is always backwards compatible with the `N-1`th state, you can't build up migrations such that it's incompatible with the `N-M`th.

Are you saying that our process is a cleanup so long after transitions that they are effectively unrelated and the finalization paradigm isn't apt?

### Backwards compatible migration

1. Modify the source `.sql` files in `src/Sql/dbo`.
2. Write a migration script, and place it in `util/Migrator/DbScripts`. Each script must be prefixed
   with the current date.

> Please take care to ensure:

Reviewer 2: **idea**: Maybe 

```suggestion
Tips to ensure backwards compatibility:
```

- any existing stored procedure accepts the same input parameters and that new parameters have
  nullable defaults
- when a column is renamed the existing stored procedures first check (coalesce) the new location
  before falling back to the old location

> - continued updating of the old data columns since in case of a rollback no data should be lost

Reviewer: 👍🏻 Love that you're talking about specific concerns to keep aware of!

> ### Non-backwards compatible migration

Reviewer: 🤔 I think we should use affirmative language here. The 'non-backwards compatible migration' is talking about a 'breaking change'.

```suggestion
### Breaking change migration
```

Author: I support the current term. The point of this documentation is that your change can't go backwards. It may be "breaking" to some, but the intention of the documentation is about direction.

These changes should be written from the perspective of "all data has been migrated" and any old
stored procedures that were kept around for backwards compatibility should be removed. Any logic for
syncing old and new data should also be removed in this step.

1. Remove the backwards compatibility that is no longer needed.

> 2. Write a new Migration and place it in `src/Migrator/DbScripts_finalization`. Name it

Reviewer 3: What does "remove the backwards compatibility" in step 1 mean - is it just referring to step 2 or does it require something else (and if so, what)?

   `YYYY-0M-FinalizationMigration.sql`.
   - Typically migrations are designed to be run in sequence. However since the migrations in
     `DbScripts_finalization` can be run out of order, care must be taken to ensure they remain
     compatible with the changes to `DbScripts`. In order to achieve this we only keep a single

>      migration, which executes all backwards incompatible schema changes.

Reviewer 3: Does this mean that `DbScripts_finalization` only ever contains 1 file? This is news to me.

Is the finalization script added at the same time as the backwards-compatible change? So there is only 1 finalization script at a time, it is always moved to `DbScripts` after the next rc cut date? What if you need a longer timeframe on your finalization?

Reviewer 4: Yes. It's always been mentioned. 

You break up a pure DB non backwards compatible change into two steps. An example would be the column rename example in https://contributing.bitwarden.com/contributing/database-migrations/edd#migrations-1. 

Initial migration would:
- Add a new column
- Add logic that keeps old and new in sync.

Transition migration would:
- Migrate all data from old to new column.

Finalization migration (run at next deploy):
- Removes the old now unused column.

Reviewer 4: Do note we technically never have to remove the old column but not doing so adds database debt since we have

- Unnecessary data in our database.
- More complex sprocs.

Reviewer 3: I could've been clearer in my question - my previous understanding was that you might have several scripts in `DbScripts_finalization` as different teams add different finalization scripts. But this way, you have 1 finalization script at a time, which all teams append to. It's been a while since I read about this process so just trying to get my head around it again.

Upon execution any finalization scripts will be [automatically moved](./edd.mdx#online-environments)

> for proper history.

Reviewer 3: What does "upon execution" refer to - the `_move_finalization_db_scripts` Github workflow?

As mentioned in Slack - how do we handle updating `src/Sql` when moving the finalization files across?

Reviewer 4: That was the purpose of `dbo_finalization`.

Reviewer 3: OK gotcha - I've reviewed the existing documentation again and understand the process better now. I think `dbo_finalization` was never automated so that was the source of my confusion.
